---
post_id: 2130
title: 'TTF Fonts for StarOffice 5.1'
date: '2004-11-02T13:35:35+01:00'

author: 'Rémi Peyronnet'
layout: post
guid: '/?p=2130'
slug: sottf_en
permalink: /2004/11/sottf_en/
URL_before_HTML_Import: 'http://www.lprp.fr/linux/sottf/sottf_en.php3'
image: /files/2018/11/police_1541282916.jpg
categories:
    - Informatique
tags:
    - Linux
    - OldWeb
    - TTF
lang: en
lang-ref: pll_5bde1df4cd826
lang-translations:
    en: sottf_en
    fr: sottf
---

StarOffice 5.1 does not have TTF support, even through the X server. In fact, StarOffice has its own font managment. There are two ways to use TTF in StarOffice. Both rely on the conversion of TTF in Type1 fonts :

- Convert TTF in Type1 and install Type1 fonts in the X server.
- Convert TTF in Type1 and install in StarOffice.

I use the second solution, that I will describe later.

# Prerequisite

To do that, you will need :

- a convert utility TTF-&gt;Type1 : **ttf2pt1** ([ttf2pt1-321.tgz](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/ttf2pt1-321.tgz) or [ttf2pt1-3.1.1-1.i386.rpm](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/ttf2pt1-3.1.1-1.i386.rpm))
- a PERL script to adapt these files : **afm.pl** ([afm.pl](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/afm.pl))
- a utility to create the fonts.dir file : **ttmkfdir** ([ttmkfdir\_1.0-5\_i386.deb](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/ttmkfdir_1.0-5_i386.deb) or [ttmkfdir.tar.gz](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/ttmkfdir.tar.gz))

To make these steps easier, I wrote two small scripts :

- Convert a file : **StarOfficeTTF.sh** ([StarOfficeTTF.sh](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/StarOfficeTTF.sh))
- Process with all fonts : **StarOfficeALL.sh** ([StarOfficeTTFAll.sh](/files/old-web/linux/sottf/StarOfficeTTFAll.sh))

# Configuration

You **have to** edit these two scripts to specify the paths of yours applications and font files :

- **SO\_PATH** or **SOPATH** : StarOffice path.
- **TEMP** : Temporary directory. This directory must be empty.

You need also to check that the link to use perl exists : `ln -s /usr/bin/perl /usr/local/bin/perl`.

# Running

Check that you have the accurate rights on the directories you specified.

Launch the script StarOfficeTTFALL.sh &lt;TTF path&gt;

The script may take some time. Check there is no errors. Is everything is ok, you shoould have the fonts you installed the next time you launch StarOffice.

# Technical Information

Here are just a few information that could be helpful :

- The .afm format for StarOffice differs slightly with the Type1 format. That’s why you need to use the afm.pl script.
- The fonts.dir file created by ttmkfdir is a little different, that’s why you need to keep only a line per file, and to change the end of the line.

*These programs are written by several authors and are distributed under GPL license.*