---
post_id: 2209
title: Programs
date: '2004-11-02T13:35:35+01:00'

author: 'Rémi Peyronnet'
layout: post
guid: '/?p=2209'
slug: soft_en
permalink: /2004/11/soft_en/
URL_before_HTML_Import: 'http://www.lprp.fr/soft/soft_en.php3'
image: /files/2017/10/wiki_1508001856.jpg
categories:
    - Informatique
tags:
    - Freeware
    - OldWeb
    - Prog
lang: en
lang-ref: pll_5be4c426cc273
lang-translations:
    en: soft_en
    fr: soft
---

Some of the softwares may not be listed here : browse the site !

## Program List

- [GUI Launcher](/2004/01/launcher_en/) : GUI to use command line tools with arguments.
- [IntelliMenu](/2003/10/im/) : Contextual menu to insert predefined text.
- [DSPGen](/2003/02/dsp_en/) : Generate Visual Studio 6 Projects.
- [IMPhoto](/2004/11/imphoto_en/) : Handy tootl to resize photos with a fixed ratio.
- [GIMP Plugins](/gimp_plugin_en/) : two GIMP plugins to work with YUV and in Fourier’s space.
- [BkmToolbar](/2003/03/bkmtoolbar_en/) : plugin to use Netscape’s bookmarks in Internet Explorer.
- [Kwirk](/2004/11/kwirk_en/) : a funny game.
- [Coma with OpenOffice](/2004/06/ooovirg_en/) : Replace the point of the numpad (numerical separator) with a coma, for french OpenOffice users.
- [Scripts](/2001/01/scripts_en/) : Some usefull scripts in Shell, Python and Perl.
- [VDBatch](/2003/08/vdbatch_en/) : Create a VirtualDub joblist, to reencode several files.
- Misc : 
    - [Laby](/2001/11/laby/) : Generate Mazes.
    - Chess : Generate chess boards.
    - Crosswords : Grenerate crossword grids.
    - [WinFM](/2001/09/winfm/) : Internet Traffic Counter.
    - [TTFDumper2](/1999/11/ttfdumper2/) : Extract information from several TTF files.

## Older Programs

- [DOS Programs](/1999/11/softdos_en/)
    - Init – Check the use of your computer
    - NoHTML – Remove HTML tags
    - SaveMEM – Save DOS memory
    - SysPause – A pause in the config.sys
- [Windows Programs](/2004/11/softwin_en/)
    - QuickLaunch – Quicklaunch keys (for Gericom’s laptops)
    - LiensLNK – Manipulate Windows’ shortcuts.
    - Rendate – Rename files with the date.
    - Alcool – Alcohol rate – UNACHIEVED
    - Cluster – Real size of files
    - Code – Codage of messages
    - WinFont – Batch names of TTF
- [Excel documents](/2000/11/softxl_en/)
    - Cassette – Tape labels.
    - Zip – Zip labels.
- [Casio Programs](/2000/10/casio/)
- [TI Programs](/2001/12/ti/)

## License

All these software are provided **“as is”** and without any warranties. These software are free : **FREEWARE**! Sources are available on demand.

You can use freely it and modify it provided you respect the following rules:

- All modification must be notified in the source code, and be documented.
- The name, the goal and the author’s name of the program, must not be altered.
- You may warn me of yours modifications.

Translations will be welcome.